Q. What are the consideration when creating an S3 bucket?
A. The most important things to consider the name and the region. The region must be the same as the 
	services that will be attached to the S3 bucket.
Q. What type of storage is S3?
A. S3 stores objects
Q. How to protect data at rest in S3 bucket?
A. To protect data at rest there is server side encryption and client side encryption. Server side 
	encrypts the data at the AWS center and client side encrypts at the user location.
Q. Explain S3 versioning
A. S3 versioning allows you to refer or revert back to previous versions of the bucket or the contents 
	of the bucket. You can retrieve deleted or corrupted items as long as they were part of a previous version.
Q. What is S3 multipart upload?
A. Multipart upload is useful for large objects(100 MB+) it allows you to upload objects in parts and in any order. 
	Any failed segments will be reattempted until successful. This option is best for large objects and use on 
	unreliable networks.
Q. Explain Lifecycle Policy in S3?
A. Lifecycle Policy allows you to define how data is stored and accessed based on predefined criteria. You can 
	choose to keep certain data available for real-time access for periods where you know it'll be frequently 
	accessed and then archive it later when it won't be as in demand. You can also set rules for when and how 
	to delete expired data.
Q. Explain Object Lock feature in AWS S3?
A. Object lock allows for Write Once Read Many time(WORM) access to information. This prevents data from being 
	altered or deleted after it is created. It can be enabled and disabled upon creation of the bucket.
Q. What is Static Website Hosting in S3?
A. Static web hosting allows you to use a S3 bucket to host a static webpage. Static webpages cannot change 
	dynamically but may contain client-side scripts.
Q. What is a object URL?
A. A url somebody can use to access a hosted object. They are defaulted as private allowing only the owner 
	permission but the owner may grant permissions for others to download the contents.
Q. Explain Elastic Block Storage?
A. Elastic Block Storage(EBS) behave like raw unformatted block devices which you can mount as devices on 
	your instances. They persist independently from the instance they are mounted to and are best used for 
	data you need long term access to.
Q. What is the difference between terminating and stopping an EC2 instance?
A. Terminating  an EC2 instance destroys it and it so you would have to create a new one to use it, whereas 
	stopping it allows you to start the same one again and retain whatever information has been stored
Q. How To Connect To Your Amazon Ec2 Instance?
A. You can connect to a Linux EC2 using a program like PuTTY to configure your SSH key and connect via the 
	IPv4 address. You connect to a Windows instance using RDP from a windows computer.
Q. What Is Amazon Machine Image (ami)?
A. AMI is a way to store AWS resource settings so that you can launch multiple identical instances without 
	having to manually configure them.
Q. What Is Public Key Credentials?
A. Public Key Credentials are generated by AWS and allow a user or somebody with permissions to access a 
	resource. If the credentials are compromised they can be reset, but that would require everybody with 
	access to update their own information.
Q. What is the relation between the Availability Zone and Region?
A. A Region contains multiple availability zones so regions are larger and each availability zone is a 
	self-contained data center. Each AZ must be a meaningful distance from another one but is within 60 miles(100 km)
Q. Name some of the AWS services that are not region-specific?
A. Billing is not region specific but instead account specific. CloudWatch and IAM are also globally specific.
Q. What are some critical differences between AWS S3 and EBS?
A. EBS is block level storage that must be connected to an EC2 instance, but the information may persist after 
	the EC2 instance is shut down. S3 is object storage good at storing vast amounts of backups and does not 
	require EC2 instances.
Q. What is CloudWatch?
A. Monitoring for AWS services which allows you to track important metrics and create alarms in case a service 
	exceeds allowances.
Q. What are the Storage Classes available in Amazon S3?
A. S3 storage classes are: S3 standard for general storage of frequently accessed data, S3 Intelligent-Tiering 
	for unknown or changing data patterns, S3 Standard IA and S3 One-Zone IA for data not often accessed but 
	sometimes accessed, and S3 Glacier for archived data the needs to be stored long-term but is rarely accessed.
Q. How can you send a request to Amazon S3?
A. You can send a request using a REST API and http methods, or the AWS SDK.
Q. What is an Instance Store Volume and an EBS Volume?
A. These services allow you to prevent data loss if an EC2 instance is stopped. Instance store provides temporary 
	block-level storage and is good for information that changes frequently. EBS volumes are automatically replicated 
	within its Availability zone and is low-latency for high performance workloads.
Q. What are Recovery Time Objective and Recovery Point Objective in AWS?
A. Recovery Time Objective is the amount of downtime a business can tolerate. Recovery Point Objective is how frequently 
	backups are created.
Q. Can you change the Private IP Address of an EC2 instance while it is running or in a stopped state?
A. Private IP addresses cannot be changed but public addresses can under certain circumstances.
Q. What are the advantages of auto-scaling?
A. Auto-scaling allows you to automate services if they exceed capacity without human intervention.
Q. Can you establish a Peering connection to a VPC in a different region?
A. Yes Peered VPC can originate in different regions.
Q. What is the role of AWS CloudTrail?
A. CloudTrail allows you to monitor activity across your AWS account as well as provide event history.
Q. Explain Amazon ElasticCache
A. Allow you to set-up, run and scale open-source compatible in-memory data stores in the cloud. Is good for 
	data intensive apps that require high throughput with low latency real-time analytics.
Q. Name the AWS service exists only to redundantly cache data and images?
A. CloudFront uses edge locations to ensure a user has the quickest access to data by caching data and images 
	where they are requested.
Q. How to connect EBS volume to multiple instances?
A. You can use EBS Multi-Attach to connect multiple volumes as long as they all have Multi-Attach enabled and 
	are in the same Availability Zone.
Q. What are the different types of Load Balancer in AWS services?
A. There are: Application at the application layer(http/https). Network at the transport layer(tcp/ssl). Classic 
	is a combination of Application and network. Gateway at the third layer of the Open Systems Interconnection(OSI), 
	the network layer.
Q. What is the use of lifecycle hooks in Autoscaling?
A. Lifecycle hooks are what track custom events which can determine when/if a service should scale.
Q. Name some of the DB engines which can be used in AWS RDS
A. PostgresQL, MySQL Amazon Aurora, Oracle and more.
Q. What is VPC peering connection?
A. A networking connection between two VPCs which enables you to route traffic between them using IPv4 or IPv6
Q. What are NAT Gateways?
A. Network Address Translation(NAT) Gateway enhances security allowing a instances in a private subnet to connect 
	to services outside your VPC without allowing external services to connect to them.
Q. What is SNS?
A. Simple Notification Service allows for messaging for application to application(A2A) and application to person(A2P). 
	Facilitates microservices and event driven serverless applications as well as enables A2P communications via SMS and email.
Q. Differences between Security group and Network access control list?
A. A security group is assigned either when launching an instance or later and you are only allowed to set rules to allow 
	certain traffic. NACLs can specify both allow and deny rules, you can do things like allow certain IP addresses which 
	is useful for preventing DDOS attacks.
Q. Differences between horizontal scaling and vertical scaling?
A. Horizontal scaling(Scale up/down) is used when you want to do things such as create larger hard-drives or use higher 
	capacity RAM. Vertical scaling(Scale in/out) is used to add more hard-drives or add an additional server.
Q. Explain what EC2 instance metadata is.
A. Data about the specific EC2 instance such as how much activity does it have and what is the host name or security group.
Q. What are some differences between ECS, and Fargate?
A. EC2 are a fleet of instances which gives greater control over the customization of the environment. Fargate allows you 
	to focus on developing and maintaining your applications with the underlying servers abstracted.
Q. Explain the S3 consistency model.
A. Strong read-after-write consistency for PUTs and DELETEs of objects in AWS S3 buckets in all Regions. Applies to 
	writes to new objects as well as PUTs that overwrite existing objects and DELETEs.
Q. What are the key capabilities provided by AWS IAM?
A. Enables you to manage access to AWS services and resources securely by allowing you to create AWS users and groups 
	to allow or deny access. Identity and Access Management allows for multi-factor authentication requiring a user to 
	demonstrate identity in more than one way, Fine-grained access control allows you to add specific conditions such 
	as time of day or originating IP address. Analyze Access to validate that your policies only provide the intended 
	public and cross-account access to your resources. Integrate with another directory connect AWS to another identity 
	system such as Microsoft AD.
Q. What are the different identities provided by IAM?
A. Users represent a person or service that will interact with AWS, user groups a collection of users with similar 
	permissions and roles which are similar to users but they cannot have any credentials ie. passwords or access keys
Q. What is an Instance Store Volume and an EBS Volume?
A. Instance Store Volume is stored on the actual instance and is lost if the instance is reset. EBS volume is a 
	replication on hardware within the Availability Zone for fault tolerance, and is not lost if the EC2 is reset.
Q. What is Cognito service
A. 
Q. If I want my instance to run on a single-tenant hardware, which value do I have to set the instance’s tenancy 
	attribute to?
A. 
Q. Another scenario based interview question. You need to configure an Amazon S3 bucket to serve static assets 
	for your public-facing web application. What permission need to be set?
A. 
Q. When you need to move data over long distances using the internet, for instance across countries or continents 
	to your Amazon S3 bucket, which method or service will you use?
A. 
Q. Why do you create subnets?
A. To limit accessibility to certain resources based on the needs of the organization.
Q. How is Amazon RDS, DynamoDB different?
A. RDS isn't a specific database service instead it's a service that allows you to launch a database on AWS. 
	DynamoDB is a fully managed database for unstructured data. 
Q. Can I run more than one DB instance for Amazon RDS for free?
A. 
Q. Provide some use cases suitable for Amazon DynamoDB
A. 
Q. What is the actual definition of the term “VPC”?
A. 
Q. What are Internet Gateways in VPC?
A. 
Q. What is a NAT Device?
A. 
Q. What is the default VPC? Explain its advantages.
A. 
Q. What do you know about VPC Peering?
A. 
Q. What are Security Groups in VPC?
A. 
Q. What do you mean by Network ACLs (Access Control List) in VPC?
A. 
Q. Can You Monitor The Network Traffic In Your Vpc?
A. 
Q. How Do You Specify Which Availability Zone My Amazon Ec2 Instances Are Launched In?
A. 

Storage-
1. Simple Storage Service(S3) - Object storage
	Universal namespace
	Features:
		Tiered Storage
		Lifecycle Management
		Versioning
		Encryption
		Multifactor Authentication(MFA) delete
		Security via ACL and bucket policy
	Bucket Creation:
		Create a unique bucket name
		Choose a useful region
		Create Bucket then configure
	S3 Security
		Encryption
		SSL Certificates
2. Elastic Block Storage(EBS) - Volumes -> hard disk
3. Elastic File System(EFS) - shared file system
4. Elastic Compute Cloud(EC2 / VM):
	SSH Keys
	Private Key
	Public Key