Azure and cloud computing

Questions to keep in mind -

- Explain Subnets?
	A- A virtual network can be partitioned into one or more sub-networks. The subnets can be separated
	logically and each subnet consists of a server
		- A subnet can be further divided into two types: Public and Private
- What are some benefits of cloud?
	A- High scalability, disaster recovery, high security, highly reliable, worldwide connectivity
- What are the different deployment models?
	A- 
		Public - allows for public access such as azure and AWS
		Private - allows for very limited access to the cloud service
		Hybrid - used by government agencies that need to store sensitive information but also need a 
			public facing presence
- What are the service models, when should you use them?
	A-
		IAAS(Infrastructure as a service) - Used when your company needs a VM, servers or storage
		PAAS(Platform as a service) - Used when your company needs a platform for building software
		SAAS(Software as a service) - Used when your company doesn't want to maintain any IT equipment
- What are different types of Data? explain?
	A-
		Structured data - Data that is defined and understoon such as SQL data
		Semi-structured data - Not as defined but does have some structure, NOSQL
		Unstructured data - Data that isn't well defined such as image or video files
- Explain Storage LifeCycle of a Data?
	A- 
		Real time - On demand, accessed often. Used for caching, searching, high performance workloads
		Near time - used for standard workloads, computations, video
		Long term - used for time based, use based, expiry based actions
		Archive - not meant to be accessed except on rare occasions. Used for backups and compliance
- What is maximum data you can store per Storage Account?
	A- 500 TB per account and each subscription can have up to 100 storage accounts by default
- Types of Storage Accounts? Explain?
	A- 
		Blob Storage - Hardware-level, generally accessed by an operating system
		Queue Storage - flat storage for unstructured data, supports massive scale, often includes metadata(tags)
		Table Storage - Simple storage system for non-relational semi-structured data
		File Storage - Managed, traditional file sharing like solution
- What are the components of a storage account url?
	A- Account name and service name
	   https://<account name>.<service name>.core.windows.net
- Explain Storage Account Properties?
	A-
		Account type - Blob, Queue, Table, File - See above
		Performance Tier -
			- Standard: Default tier with typical speeds for most production workloads
			- Premium: High performance. 
				GPv1/GPv2 for unmanaged disks and page blob
				Blob storage doesn't support
				Block blob: block and append blobs do support it
				File storage supports for files only
		Replication - LRS, GRS, ZRS, GZRS - See below
		Access Tier - Hot(immediate access), Cool(occasional access), Archive(rare access long-term)
- Explain the types of Replication?
	A- https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-redundancy
		LRS(Locally-redundant storage) replication to 3 other units within the region
		GRS(Geo-redundant storage) replication to a secondary region, includes LRS-like replication
		ZRS(Zone-redundant storage) replication to up to 3 availability zones within the region
		GZRS(Geo-zone-redundant storage) a combination of ZRS and GRS
- Types of Blob Storage?
	A- 
		Block Blob - Used for streaming workloads, each blob consists of a sequence of blocks, 200 GB per blob
		Page Blob - Used for random read/write workloads, blobs consist of an array of pages, 1TB per blob
- What is Disaster Recovery? Explain?
	A- a system's ability to backup and restore data, apps and resources as needed. Azure supports
	this by allowing users to regularly backup resources, connect on-prem to on-prem, connect on-prem to cloud etc.
- What is Scalability? Explain it types?
	A- Scalability is a system's ability to adapt to an increase or decrease in demand
		Scale out/in - This refers to creating more resources by adding more infrastructure ie. more VMs storage etc.
		Scale up/down - This refers to adding more resources to your in place infrastructure ie larger storage units
- What is the hierarchy for creating a resource in Azure?
	A- The resource hierarchy for Azure resources is Subscription/ Resource Group/ Resource
- What are the default entities Table Storage has?
	A- Partition key and row key. The row key must be unique.
- What is the Hierarchy of Table storage?
	A- In addition to the subscription and resource group a table storage hierarchy is Storage Account/ Table/ Entities
- What is max size supported for Queue storage?
	A- A queue storage account can support up to 500 TB, but each message can only be 64 KB
- Does Queue Storage support first-in-first-out model? explain?
	A- No, a message in queue storage only leaves when its condition is met or it is dequeued either
	manually or an automated dequeue condition is met
- What are the Protocals followed by file storage?
	A- Server Message Bus(SMB) for windows systems and REST/HTTP(File Rest api)
- What is the Hierarchy of File storage?
	A- The hierarchy of file storage is Storage Account/ File Storage or container/ Files and Folders
- What are common Access Control Features? explain?
	A- Account Keys- come in primary and secondary, provide full access and should be used sparingly
	   Storage Access Signature(SAS)- can be given more freely and can be limited to restrict access and functionallity
	   Role Based Access Control(RBAC)- associated with an identity, can control management and data layer access
- Explain the kinds of Encryption w.r.t Data security?
- What are the types of SAS blob storage supports?
	A- blob storage supports Service SAS which restricts access to a specific service.
- What are the RBAC types?
	A- Management Actions: actions on the resources ie file storage or blob storage.
	   Data Actions: actions on the data inside the storage
- Explain Azure Data Box?
	A- Azure Data Box is a way of moving on-premesis data to the cloud, often used when the amount of data being tranfered
	   is too large to be efficiantly transferred over the internet. A user prepares their data to be shipped to the data
	   center, the physical drives are then shipped to the center and there the data is copied to the storage account then
	   the drives are sent back to the user
	   Data box heavy: Capacity 1PB, weight 500+ lb
	   Data Box: Capacity 100TB, weight 50 lb
	   Data Box Disk: capacity 8TB can be ordered in packs of up to 4 to total 40TB
- Explain CDN?
	A- Content Delivery Network(CDN) is a way to efficiently deliver content to users who are far away from where the data
	   is primarily being stored, so it can be accessed quickly. If the hosting server for some static data is in western US
	   but the client is in South Africa it would take a long time for the data to reach the user when it's requested, so a
	   CDN will cache the data in a closer region when the user calls it so subsequent requests are quicker
- Explain ADLS?
	A- Azure Data Lake Storage(ADLS) is designed for large volumes of unstructured data to be processed quickly and is good
	   for encrypted processing of analytical data such as data being used in data science modeling and machine learning
- What are ADLS connectivity types?
	A- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2uSkjBEwwq0
	   Windows Azures Storage Blob(WASB): Classic way of connecting using the original drivers used to leverage Blob storage
	   but contains significant storage degradation. Works nicely with older SDKs
	   Azure Blob File System(ABFS): Usable with Hadoop Distributed File Systems(HDFS), this is an updated driver using 
	   ADLS Rest API
- What is the difference between Blob & ADLS?
	A- ADLS supports a true file structure whereas blob storage has a psuedo file structure made up of objects
	   ADLS supports a hierarchical namespace
- Explain Blobfuse?
	A- Allows a user to mount a blob storage onto a linux machine using libfuse. This allows the user to use the blob storage
	   the same way they would use any other storage system on their local machine the difference being the blobfuse storage
	   is actually being hosted in the cloud. Supports parallel download and upload and can be cached locally
- Explain NFS?
	A- https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/network-file-system-protocol-support-how-to?tabs=azure-powershell
	   Mount a blob storage account to a Linux VM over a virtual network, is configured to only accept traffic over the VNet
- What is the difference between Blobfuse & NFS?
	A- Blobfuse focusses on mounting a file system, but NFS focusses on mounting containers. NFS supports hierarchical
	   namespace. Blobbuse mounts file systems specifically whereas NFS mounts more generic containers
- What is hierarchical namespace?
	A- https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/data-lake-storage-namespace
	   A tree-like structure where a user with RBAC permissions has access to sub-namespaces due to policy inheritance. A user
	   with access to a namespace doesn't automatically have access to parallel namespace trees. It is much more efficient 
	   then a typical object style directory hierarchy
- Explain Static Webpage?
	A- A webpage that changes very infrequently and is typically fully loaded when it it requested, and has the same information
	   for all users
- Explain the difference between static and dynamic webpages?
	A- Static webpages are user independent and are not connected to a database whereas a dynamic webpage is connected to a
	   database and different parts of the page can be loaded in or changed at anytime.
- What is VPN Gateway?
	A- A corridor between resources across different networks. Typically used to connect on-prem to cloud, connection is 
	   established over public internet but is encrypted for added security
- What is VNet Peering?
	A- A connection between two networks that allows for a low latency private connection between the networks so they can
	   act as if they were on the same network
- What is the difference between public and private IP addresses?
	A- Private IP is used to communicate within a network whereas public is used to communicate outside the network ie. on the
	   internet
- What are the key features App Service supports?
	A- 
	   Infrastructure Management- No need to patch, maintain etc.
	   High Availability- Runs apps on multiple nodes
	   Auto-Scaling- auto-scale to meet customer demand
	   Streamlined Development- integrated development and troubleshooting tools
	   CI/CD- features such as staging slots
	   Azure integration- used with VNets and Azure AD
- What is the resource hierarchy for web apps?
	A- resource group / App service plan / app
- What are some ways to deploy a web app?
	A- Visual Studio / GitHub / OneDrive / BitBucket / Azure Repos

Deployment models -
	public cloud - Azure, AWS IBM Cloud
		a) services are stored off-site
		b) can be accessed by the general public
		c) all software, hardware and other infrastructure is owned by the cloud provider

	private cloud - AWS, VMware
		a) cloud infrastructure is used exclusively by a single organization
		b) may be run privately or outsourced to a hosting company
		c) services and infrastructure are mainained on a private network

	hybrid cloud - Federal agencies opt for private cloud for sensitive information and public cloud for general consumption
		a) contains elements of both public and private cloud

Service models -
	IAAS (Infrastructure as a service) - used by IT administrators
		a) provides basic computing infrastructure
		b) services are available on a Pay-for-use basis

	PAAS (Platform as a service) - used by developers
		a) provides cloud platforms and runtime environments for developing, testing and managing applications
		b) allows developers to deploy applications without requiring all of the infrastructure

	SAAS (Software as a service) - used by general users
		a) cloud providers host and manage software on a Pay-for-use basis
		b) fully managed by the cloud provider so the end user doesn't have to maintain anything

Azure physical infrastructure hierarchy -
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/availability-zones/media/az-overview/az-graphic-two.png
	Region - 
		a) can contain multiple any number of data centers and availability zones and are globally distributed
		b) currently about 60 regions globally
		c) not all services are available in all regions - could be relevant when choosing a region to deploy to
			* a good tool to test the fastest region for your location is https://azurespeedtest.azurewebsites.net/
			* a tool to test which products are available in a region is https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/global-infrastructure/services/

	Availability zone - a collection of data centers with the purpose of allowing for back-ups for data centers

	Data center - used to host a group of network servers with their own power, cooling and network infrastructure
	
Fault tolerance -
	Proactive -
		a) regularly backup data, apps, resources
		b) deploy to multiple availability zones or regions
		c) Load balance across multiple availibility zones or regions
		d) monitor health of data, apps, resources
	Reactive -
		a) restore data, apps, resources to different availability zones
		b) deploy to different availability zones or regions

Desaster recovery - can use azure to restore
	a) regularly backup data, apps, resources
	b) on-prem to on-prem
	c) on-prem to cloud
	d) other cloud to Azure
	e) Azure to Azure

Scalability -
	Scaling Out - non-disruptive aka doesn't require a reset
		a) increase instance count of resources

	Scaling up - disruptive aka requires a reset
		a) Increase instance size of existing resources

Elasticity - the ability to adapt to changing demands by scaling up, down, out, in

Azure hierarchy for subscription is: Subscription - Azure Region - (Tenant, Resource group VM, Resource group Network)
hierarchy for Active Directory is: Subscription - Azure Region - Tenant
hierarchy for Virtual Machine is: Subscription - Azure Region - Resource group
heirarchy for Virtual Network is: Subscription - Azure Region - Resource group
hierarchy for Storage is: Subscription - Azure region - Resource group

Major Azure service groups -
	Compute - VM, VM Scale sets, Cloud services, contianers etc.
	Networking - Virtual network, Azure DNS, Application gateway, Traffic manager etc.
	Data and Storage - Disk storage, Blob storage, File storage, Queue storage, Table storage, StorSimple
	Web and Mobile - Web apps, Mobile apps, Logic apps, Contend delivery network
	Other Services - Azure AD, Site Recovery, Network watcher, Azure security center, etc.

Storage data types -
	Structured data
		1) well defined data such as data from a RDMS

	Semi-structured data
		1) not as defined as structured data - NOSQL data includes JSON formatted data and graphs

	Unstructured data
		1) not well organized, may have an internal structure but it is not know to us - image or video files

Storage lifecycle -
	Real time - caching, search, performance workloads, event processing
		Replication requirements - low
		Cost - high
		Speed of access - high
		Read / write mix - heavy R/W

	Near time - compute, video, standard workloads
		Replication requirements - low
			Cost - high
			Speed of access - medium
			Read / write mix - balanced R/W

	Long term - time-based, use-based, expiry based, size based
		Replication requirements - medium
		Cost - medium
		Speed of access - low
		Read / write mix - mostly read

	Archive - backup, compliance
		Replication requirements - high
		Cost - low
		Speed of access - low
		Read / write mix - read on demand

Azure Data lake service – Gen 2 (ADLS) is currently preferred
	Designed for storage of big (unstructured) data
	Supports massive volumes
	Supports massive throughput
	Cost-effective
	Provides HDFS compatible storage to analytics tools, including HDInsight, Hadoop etc.
	Supports various management features including security, a hierarchical namespace and encryption

Data Lake – Management and Security:
	* differences between blob and ADLS- 
		1) ADLS supports a true file system
		2) ADLS supports hierarchical namespace

	Blob storage functionality is still available
		Access tie and lifecycle management
		Global scale
	Security (including features from Blob storage)
Connectivity:
	WASB-
		1) original driver used to leverage blob storage
		2) prior to ADLS Gen2 this helped map file system semantics
		3) Contained significant performance degradation
	ABFS-
		1) updated driver using ADLS Rest API
		2) improved performance, able to leverage hierarchical file system and operational optimizations

BlobFuse – open source project developed to provide a virtual file system backed by Azure Blob storage
Uses libfuse open source library to communicate with the Linux FUSE kernel model and implements the file 
system operations using the Azure Storage Blob REST APIs
-Features
	Mount a Blob storage on a Linux machine
	Basic file system operations ie. Mkdir, opendir, readdir, rmdir, open, read, create, write, close, unlink, truncate, stat, rename
	Local cache to improve subsequent access times
	parallel download and upload
	allows multiple nodes to mount the same container for read-only scenarios
	authenticates using storage key, SaS, Managed Identity and Serivce Principal Names(SPN)
Network File System(NFS) 3.0 – Allows a user to mount blob storage to a Linux VM
Mounting NFS:
	Register NFS protocol to your subscription
	Verify that it is registered
	Create a VNet
	Configure network security
	Create and configure the storage account to accept traffic only from the VNet
	Create a container in the storage account
	Mount the container

Static Web Page -
	A web page that displays the same information to all users and is not customazable, and suited to content that 
	rarely or never needs to be updated

PowerShell --
	built into .NET framework and is a scripting as well as an interactive command environment
	allows for easier automation of repetitive tasks

Benefits of PowerShell-
	Trusted by System Administrators
	Most GUIs are PowerShell front ends
	Easy automation
	Scalable management
	Manipulate server and workstation components
	Prepare for Microsoft certifications
	Can be used to create text files, backups, parse files and data

PowerShell Modules-
	to find installed modules: Get-Module -ListAvailable
	to find already installed modules: Get-Module
	to find all commands in a module: Get-Command -Module <module-name>
	to get help for commands in a module Get-Help <command-name>
	to download and install the help files for commands: Update-Help -Module <module-name>

Important commands in PowerShell-
	command-let to get information on how to use command-lets: Get-Help
	command-let to get only commands imported into PowerShell: Get-Command
	command-let to get objects that represent stopped and started services on a computer: Get-Service

PowerShell Variables- Variable names can include the underscore character and any alphanumeric character. They are
specified using the '$' character followed by the variable name
	PS>$loc creates a variable named loc
	PS>$loc=Get-Location sends the output of get location to $loc
	PS>$loc|Get-Member -MemberType Property Uses Get-Member to display information about the contents of the variable

PowerShell Pipelines: uses the '|' character to send the result of the preceeding command to the next command
	Command-1|Command-2|Command-3

Creating a VM using PowerShell-
	Create Resource group
	select VM size
	select Image aka OS
	Note Administrator account details
	Inbound Ports: RDP(3389) for Windows and SSH(22) for Linux

Create Storage Account using PowerShell-
	Create Resource group
	select region
	select SKU ex. Standard_LRS
	account kind ex. StorageV2

Create Users, groups using PowerShell-
	Create a User
	Create a Group
	Add the user to the group

VNet Peering: Create peered networks in the same subscription between two different subscriptions. Peered networks have
low latency, high bandwidth connection and have a private connection as if they are in the same VNet

VNet to VNet: can connect your VNets using a VPN connection, using this connection you can create a VPN gateway in each
virtual network. VPN gateway can also be used to provide a connection to an on-premises network. This is called a 
site-to-site connection. In both cases a secure tunnel using IPsec/IKE provides the communication between networks

Information for creating a VPN gateway: It can take up to 45 minutes to provision VPN Gateway
	Name and Gateway type: name your gateway and use VPN gateway type
	VPN Type: most VPN types are route based. Rouge based VPN does not reference VPN tunnel
	Virtual Network: associate your VPN gateway with a VNet
	SKU: the SKU will affect the number of tunnels you can have and aggregate throughput benchmark
	IP Address: Gateways need a public IP in its configuration in order to enable communication with remote networks

Configuring private and public IP Addresses: IP addresses are used to communicate with Azure resources, on-premises network
and the internet. There are two types of IP Address Private and Public.
	Private IP Address: used for communication within Azure VNet and on-premises network, when you use a VPN gateway or
	ExpressRoute circuit to extend your network to Azure
	Public IP: used for communication with the internet including Azure public facing services

Routes: Routes are used to direct traffic in a virtual network between different resources and subnets a distance between
two resources is known as a hop
Order of operations for building a route system:
	1) Create the rout table- This is very straightforward but be mindful of the Border Gateway Protocol(BGP) route propagation
	settings. Most of the time you will want this enabled because routes will automatically be added to the route table of the 
	subnet with BGP propagation enabled
	2) Whe creating a route there are several next hop types:
		- using virtual appliance
		- using VNet gateway
		- internet
		- none
	3) Each subnet can have zero or one route table associated with it, not multiples

Azure Domain Name Service(DNS): a hosting service for DNS Domains, DNS provides name resolution by resolving a website or
service name to its IP address.
Elements of DNS:
	Root Domain- Top level of the DNS Hierarchy
	Top-Level Domain- Under the domain ex. com, org, gov, edu
	Second-Level Domain- private domains that are owned and managed locally i.e. Contoso
	Sub-Domain- Under second level i.e. sales.contoso.com
	Individual Machine- the computer which the DNS is resolved to i.e. mail.yahoo.com

Network Security Group(NSG): can be used to limit network traffic to resources in a VNet. NSG contains a list of security 
rules allowing or denying inbound and outbound traffic. NSGs are associated with subnet or network interface

Load Balancer: provides a higher level of availability and scale by spreading incomming request across virtual machines. Can
create a load balancer within the Azure Portal to support inbound and outbound scenarios, can distribute traffic internally
within the Azure infrastructure
	Load balancers are placed outside of VNet and subnet, but manage servers within a VM Scale set inside the two network layers

Azure cache for Redis:
	In memory data store based on open-source software Redis
	Secure, dedicated Redis cache managed by Microsoft
	Used as a data store, distribution non-relational database or message broker
	imporves performance and scalability when heavily using backend data store
	Key-value pair based storage
	*Great for Cache-aside, content caching, user session caching, job and message queuing, distributed transactions
Redis tiers:
	Basic: single node, sizes 250MB - 53GB. Ideal for non-critical workloads
	Standard: Two-node replication with high-avaiability SLA
	Premium: Enterprise-ready. More features with higher throughput and lower latency

Azure App Service:
Key Feature-
	Infrastructure Management- no need to patch, maintain, or manage underlying infrastructure
	High Availability- built-in support for high availability. Azure app service runs apps on multiple nodes
	Auto-Scaling- leverage familiar auto-scaling capabilities to ensure your app meets customer demand
	Streamlined Development- integrated development and troubleshooting tools to streamline development
	Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment(CI/CD)- features such as staging slots
	Azure Integration- integration with many Azure services and features, such as VNets and Azure AD
Pricing-
	Shared- cheaper plans with fewer features where your apps can run on the same computer as other customers
	Dedicated- only apps belonging to the App Service Plan run on these dedicated compute nodes, includes additional features
	Isolated- Entirely dedicated and isolated to a customer's network. Includes greater scale-out capacity
Resource Hierarchy: Resource Group - App Service Plan - Web App
Deployment from various sources: GitHub, OneDrive, Dropbox, Azure Repos, Bitbucket etc.
Deployment slots:
	Production- The only mandatory slot, hosts your primary / live app
	Staging- This is a user generated slot that generally holds a version of the app that is used for back-up or updates
			 when the app needs to be taken down to clear cache or updated to a new version
	Swap Operations- changes out one deployment slot for another
Monitoring Metrics:
	Azure Monitor- app service leverages this to provide access to metrics (as well as autoscale), for App Service apps
	Metrics- available by default and require no additional configuration for your app
	Quotas- provides a view of the current utilization of important resources, with respect to App Service Plan limitations
Monitoring Logs:
	Integrated logging- plans can expose log information both through the platform, and through monitor logs
	Diagnostic Logs- gain access to application, web server, and other log information for Windows and Linux apps. Can be
					 forwarded to Log Analytics
	Activity Logs- for resource level events, this includes information about the operations (who/when/what) for your app
Application Insights:
	Supports many environments- Sollutions built in .NET, Node.js, Java, Python are supported (wherever the solution is hosted)
	Usage analysis- includes a range of features to understand how users use your app (e.g. retention)
	Metrics- Explore metrics over time (metrics explorer) or view them in near-real time (metrics streams)
	Application Map- view connectivity between components to help understand health and perfomance
	Application profiler- analyze and trace application performance, and gain an understanding of "hot" code
	Alerts- configure alerts for application performance and availability issues
Application Insights Architecture:
	Application Insights-
	Instrumentation(code)- refers to the SDKs which were deployed
	Instrumentation(codeless)- uses an agent to collect data
Azure Batch Service:
	Azure batch is an IaaS offering that runs large scale parallel and HPC jobs
	Use this service to run large scale parallel and high performance computing batch jobs
	Azure batch service will automatically manage the pool of nodes
	wil automatically install the required applications on the virtual machines
	can also automatically schedule the jobs to run on the virtual machines
	Examples of workloads you can run using batch service are
		3D image rendering
		Financial risk modeling using Monte Carlo simulations
		Image analysis
		Media transcoding
Azure batch workflow components:
	Storage account(holds input/output)
	Batch addount(top level container)
	Pools(VM size and quantity)
	Jobs(logical group for tasks)
	Tasks(actual items of work)